@c Copyright 1992, 1993, 1994, 1996, 1997, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002
@c Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c This file is part of the documentation for the GAS manual

@c Configuration settings for all-inclusive version of manual

@c switches:------------------------------------------------------------
@c Properties of the manual
@c ========================
@c Discuss all architectures?
@c @set ALL-ARCH
@c A generic form of manual (not tailored to specific target)?
@set GENERIC
@c Include text on assembler internals?
@clear INTERNALS
@c Many object formats supported in this config?
@c @set MULTI-OBJ

@c Object formats of interest
@c ==========================
@c @set AOUT
@c @set BOUT
@c @set COFF
@set ELF
@c @set SOM

@c CPUs of interest
@c ================
@c @set A29K
@c @set ALPHA
@c @set ARC
@c @set ARM
@c @set CRIS
@c @set D10V
@c @set D30V
@c @set H8/300
@c @set H8/500
@c @set HPPA
@c @set I370
@c @set I80386
@c @set I860
@c @set I960
@c @set M32R
@c @set M68HC11
@c @set M680X0
@c @set M880X0
@c @set MCORE
@c @set MIPS
@c @set MMIX
@c @set PDP11
@c @set PJ
@c @set PPC
@c @set SH
@c @set SPARC
@set TRICORE
@c @set C54X
@c @set V850
@c @set VAX
@c @set VXWORKS
@c @set Z8000

@c Does this version of the assembler use the difference-table kluge?
@c @set DIFF-TBL-KLUGE

@c Do all machines described use IEEE floating point?
@set IEEEFLOAT

@c Is a word 32 bits, or 16?
@c @set W32
@set W16

@c Do symbols have different characters than usual?
@clear SPECIAL-SYMS

@c strings:------------------------------------------------------------
@c Name of the assembler:
@set AS GNU as
@c Name of C compiler:
@set GCC GNU cc
@c Name of linker:
@set LD GNU ld
@c Text for target machine (best not used in generic case; but just in case...)
@set TARGET TriCore
@c Name of object format NOT SET in generic version
@clear OBJ-NAME
